---
layout: post
title: "Nobel 2020"
author: Mostafa
tags: nobel prize science
---

Past few days were filled with news of 2020 Nobel laureates.
While I had always liked the Nobel prizes, I found and read this article online:
["The Absurdity of the Nobel Prizes in Science"](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/10/the-absurdity-of-the-nobel-prizes-in-science/541863/) and it changed my mind.
I always thought Nobel celebrates good and influential scientists and what could be wrong with that?!
As it turns out quite a lot!
Science is increasingly collaborative.
Meaningful discoveries are often the result of collaboration between multiple labs, PIs, and an army of postdocs, students, and technicians who usually do the hard work in the labs.
Nobel only chooses 3 people for each discovery and it is causing controversies as to who get to go down in history with the badge of honour.
As the article points out, such controversies already occurred multiple times and similar events ensued right after the announcement of the Nobel for chemistry in 2020.
Someone else with significant role in developing the celebrated technique was omitted.

While celebrating life-long work of scientists and bringing in into the public domain is positive, Nobel does much more than that.
It writes the history of who did what—and only up to 3 people are allowed to do stuff.
And by so doing, it discounts (and discourages) many more who were not as _lucky_ to be on that final shortlist.

But what is the solution?
A few options come to my mind:
- Institutions could be awarded instead of individuals—just like the 2012 Peace Nobel for the European Union.
- Articles, or a group of articles, could be awarded.
Doing so acknowledges the contribution of all the authors (which is hundreds of people in some cases) and their respective institutions.